Create 0008-swift-prometheus.md (#22)
swift-server/sswg: proposals/0008-swift-prometheus.md

# SwiftPrometheus - Prometheus Metrics in Swift

* Proposal: SSWG-0008
* Authors: [Jari Koopman / LotU](https://github.com/MrLotU)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status:  [Implemented ](https://github.com/MrLotU/SwiftPrometheus/tree/MetricsLib)
* Pitch: [Pitches/Prometheus](https://forums.swift.org/t/client-side-prometheus-implementation/18098/)

## Package Description
Prometheus client side implementation.

|  |  |
|--|--|

> | **Package Name** | `SwiftPrometheus` |

Reviewer: i suggest SwiftPrometheusClient or something along these lines since this is a client library to a prometheus server

Author: What I've seen from Prometheus clients in other languages is that they generally don't include `Client` in the name, since most (if not all) packages are clients. The server side is provided by Prometheus itself and there's not much of a point porting it to another language.

Reviewer: /cc @swift-server/sswg i believe we decided we wanted to have names that are explicit

Reviewer 2: In this specific case I think it'd probably be fine to stay as `SwiftPrometheus` as "prometheus" is the server and that does not really have different versions, it's kind of "assumed we know which one: the only one", so `Lang + Prometheus` explains enough what this is I thought. Maybe we could add the client wording in the docs right away in first lines though.

On naming though @weissi had some good ideas / plans / insights, maybe sanity check please?

Reviewer: i can see why we could look the other way in this case as its pretty clear this is not "prometheus" the server, but /cc @weissi  and rest of @swift-server/sswg  in case they feel strongly about it

Reviewer 3: I don't feel strongly - happy either way.

> | **Module Name** | `Prometheus` & `PrometheusMetrics` |

Reviewer: Prometheus -> PrometheusClient?

Author: Will update this. Thanks 👍

Author: Oh, misread. For the same reasons I mentioned above, I prefer not to rename to `PrometheusClient` (it's the name of the class in the module, not the module itself) but I will remove the `PrometheusMetrics` section since it's not there anymore :)

| **Proposed Maturity Level** | [Sandbox](https://github.com/swift-server/sswg/blob/master/process/incubation.md#process-diagram) |
| **License** | [Apache 2.0](https://github.com/MrLotU/SwiftPrometheus/blob/master/LICENSE) |

> | **Dependencies** | swift-nio 1.0.0..<3.0.0 (1.x.x & 2.x.x) - swift-metrics > 1.0.0 |

Reviewer: does is actually support both swift-nio 1 an swift-nio 2?

Author: The idea here (also see https://github.com/MrLotU/SwiftPrometheus/pull/12) is to have a 1.x release for NIO 2 and a 0.x release for NIO 1

// - Histogram
// Histograms use special labels, different than the Counter & Gauge
struct HistogramLabel: HistogramLabels {
   var le: String = ""
   let route: String

   init() {
       self.route = "*"
   }

   init(_ route: String) {
       self.route = route
   }
}

let histogram = myProm.createHistogram(forType: Double.self, named: "my_histogram", helpText: "Just a histogram", labels: HistogramLabel.self)

histogram.observe(123) // Observes a value

// - Summary
// Like Histograms, Summaries use different label types.
struct SummaryLabel: SummaryLabels {
   var quantile: String = ""
   let route: String

   init() {
       self.route = "*"
   }

   init(_ route: String) {
       self.route = route
   }
}

let summary = myProm.createSummary(forType: Double.self, named: "my_summary", helpText: "Just a summary", labels: SummaryLabel.self)

summary.observe(123) // Observes a value
```
Then, after you have some metric types, you can use `.collect()` on your `PromtheusClient` to get your Prometheus formatted string with all the data.
For example, in a Vapor app:
```swift
router.get("/metrics") { req -> String in 
    return myProm.collect()
}
```

> #### With swift-metrics

Reviewer: i suggest putting this section before "Without swift-metrics" since the goal is for users (ie app/service developers) to use the standard API unless they need to reach out to features not covered by it. may worth articulating this as well.

Author: The reason I have the "Without" section first is because of the fact it allows for the more powerfull APIs. How I understood the role of `swift-metrics` was that it should be used by packages and libraries, but that end users should (if desired by the library) use the library directly.

If that's not the case, I'm open to changing this 😄

Reviewer: the stated goal of the standard API is to encourage mobility between different backends solutions. prometheus is popular today, but another solution is likely to appear with time and replace it - the same way that prometheus replaced previous popular choices. as such we strongly encourage applications to use the standard API where possible and minimize reliance on solution-specific APIs

Reviewer 4: I don't have strong feelings, but I do think if in general we're leaning toward using `swift-metrics` then that makes sense. I will say though, except for widely-used OSS projects, internally I'm likely to mostly use `SwiftPrometheus` directly to leverage its extra capabilities (like the help text associated with a metric) since [we're heavily invested](https://vimeo.com/274820706) there.

Reviewer: @Yasumoto as mentioned above, the goal of the standard API is to encourage mobility between different backends solutions. as such, we expect libraries to *always* adopt the swift-metrics API, and applications to *prefer* using swift-metrics API unless they need features from the specific backend implementation eg `SwiftPrometheus`. my suggestion is to make this document more clearly reflect these design goals. its close, but still comes across as encouraging using the `SwiftPrometheus` API over the standard one, which can cause users trouble with code mobility

Reviewer 2: I would like to second this, can we please re-order the "with/without" so that with swift metrics is first?

This does not mean that using this lib directly isn't good -- totally is, but we really need to put out first that this integrates with the metrics ecosystem (for libraries). And if users consciously _want to_ use this lib -- as you say @Yasumoto, you'd deliberately want to use the lib directly, but you'd really also want all libraries you use to use the metrics-api, rather than, say, statsd, since you want all libs to talk to your preferred backed: prometheus. :)

Author: Reordered them. Thanks for the input guys! 😄

Reviewer 4: 100% the right move, thanks folks! 🎉

# SwiftPrometheus - Prometheus Metrics in Swift

* Proposal: SSWG-0008
* Authors: [Jari Koopman / LotU](https://github.com/MrLotU)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status:  [Implemented ](https://github.com/MrLotU/SwiftPrometheus/)
* Pitch: [Pitches/Prometheus](https://forums.swift.org/t/client-side-prometheus-implementation/18098/)

## Package Description
Prometheus client side implementation.

|  |  |
|--|--|
| **Package Name** | `SwiftPrometheus` |
| **Module Name** | `Prometheus` |
| **Proposed Maturity Level** | [Sandbox](https://github.com/swift-server/sswg/blob/master/process/incubation.md#process-diagram) |
| **License** | [Apache 2.0](https://github.com/MrLotU/SwiftPrometheus/blob/master/LICENSE) |
| **Dependencies** | swift-nio 1.x.x or 2.x.x<sup>[1](#footnote_1)</sup> - swift-metrics > 1.0.0 |

## Introduction

> _For a background on metrics see the metrics proposal [discussion](https://forums.swift.org/t/discussion-server-metrics-api/19600) and [feedback](https://forums.swift.org/t/feedback-server-metrics-api/21353) thread._

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_For a background on [`swift-metrics`](https://github.com/apple/swift-metrics) see the metrics [proposal discussion](https://forums.swift.org/t/discussion-server-metrics-api/19600) and [feedback](https://forums.swift.org/t/feedback-server-metrics-api/21353) threads._
```

> Prometheus is one of the most widely used libraries for metrics in the serverside world. SwiftPrometheus is a client side implementation in Swift, with the ability to use it both connected to & separately from swift-metrics.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) is a service that scrapes metrics from other services, and stores them in a time series database to be queried and alerted upon. SwiftPrometheus is a client-side library to allow packages to export metrics in the [Prometheus format](https://openmetrics.io) in Swift, with the ability to use it both connected to & separately from swift-metrics.
```

## Motivation

> With Prometheus being one of the most widely used metric reporting tools, it's a buildstone that can not be left out in a serverside ecosystem. This package is created for everyone to use & build upon for their metric reporting.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With Prometheus being one of the most widely used metric reporting tools, as well as a [graduated project of the Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/announcement/2018/08/09/prometheus-graduates/), it's a cornerstone that can not be left out in a serverside ecosystem. This package is created for everyone to use & build upon for their metric reporting.
```

## Detailed design

SwiftPrometheus works around one base class `PrometheusClient` and some metric types around it. The prometheus metric types are:

> (from the prometheus docs)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(from the [prometheus docs](https://www.prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/))
```

> SwiftPrometheus works around one base class `PrometheusClient` and some metric types around it. The prometheus metric types are:

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like this: 

```suggestion
`SwiftPrometheus` is a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) client implementation, conforming to the `SwiftMetrics` API. It centers around the `PrometheusClient` class, and provides various metric types.

Swift _libraries_ should prefer depend and use the generic `SwiftMetrics` API, in order to not force end users down the path of using a specific backend. Swift _applications_ though should bootstrap the `PrometheusClient` and use the `SwiftMetrics` API _when practical_, yet are free to use the `PrometheusClient` directly as well – as an application does not need to concern itself with its consumers being "locked into" a specific backend.
```

Would address the worry @tomerd voices below about the confusion when to use which API?

It is tremendously important that libraries use the abstract API, but applications may use whichever specific lib they want -- including this one 👍

> (from the [prometheus docs](https://www.prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The prometheus metric types are (from the [prometheus docs](https://www.prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/)):
```

Author: This is on the line above, right?

Author: Wait. This just looked different in preview. Nevermind me.

[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) is a service that scrapes metrics from other services, and stores them in a time series database to be queried and alerted upon. SwiftPrometheus is a client-side library to allow packages to export metrics in the [Prometheus format](https://openmetrics.io) in Swift, with the ability to use it both connected to & separately from swift-metrics.

## Motivation

With Prometheus being one of the most widely used metric reporting tools, as well as a [graduated project of the Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/announcement/2018/08/09/prometheus-graduates/), it's a cornerstone that can not be left out in a serverside ecosystem. This package is created for everyone to use & build upon for their metric reporting.

## Detailed design

`SwiftPrometheus` is a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) client implementation, conforming to the `SwiftMetrics` API. It centers around the `PrometheusClient` class, and provides various metric types.

> Swift _libraries_ should prefer depend and use the generic `SwiftMetrics` API, in order to not force end users down the path of using a specific backend. Swift _applications_ though should bootstrap the `PrometheusClient` and use the `SwiftMetrics` API _when practical_, yet are free to use the `PrometheusClient` directly as well – as an application does not need to concern itself with its consumers being "locked into" a specific backend.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Swift _libraries_ should depend upon and use the generic `SwiftMetrics` API, in order to not force end-users down the path of using a specific backend. Swift _applications_ though should bootstrap the `PrometheusClient` and use the `SwiftMetrics` API _when practical_, yet are free to use the `PrometheusClient` directly as well – as an application does not need to concern itself with its consumers being "locked into" a specific backend.
```

> The prometheus metric types are (from the [prometheus docs](https://www.prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/)):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [Prometheus metric types](https://www.prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/) are:
```

* Counter - A  *counter*  is a cumulative metric that represents a single [monotonically increasing counter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monotonic_function) whose value can only increase or be reset to zero on restart.
* Gauge - A  *gauge*  is a metric that represents a single numerical value that can arbitrarily go up and down.
* Histogram - A  *histogram*  samples observations (usually things like request durations or response sizes) and counts them in configurable buckets. It also provides a sum of all observed values.
* Summary - Similar to a  *histogram* , a  *summary*  samples observations (usually things like request durations and response sizes). While it also provides a total count of observations and a sum of all observed values, it calculates configurable quantiles over a sliding time window.

SwiftPrometheus provides fully featured implementations for all of them, including a thin wrapper around them for integration with `swift-metrics`.

### API Layout

> Below section will lay out the public API of this package. For the internal APIs I would suggest you to read through the code on GitHub :smile:. This section is split up into two parts, using it integrated with the `swift-metrics` package or using this library standalone.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following section describes the public API of this package and is split into two parts. The first describes the suggested pattern of integrating directly with the `swift-metrics` package. The second delves into the increased flexibility granted by directly working with Prometheus metric types, at the cost of increased lock-in.
```

#### With swift-metrics
For use with swift-metrics, bootstrap the MetricsSystem with an instance of `PrometheusClient`:
```swift
let myProm = PrometheusClient()
MetricsSystem.bootstrap(myProm)
```
After that, you can use the metric types used by swift-metrics for your metrics. The mapping is as follows:
| swift-metrics | SwiftPrometheus |
|--|--|
| Counter | Counter |
| Gauge | Gauge |
| Recorder (agg) | Histogram |
| Timer | Summary |

---

To get a hold of your `PrometheusClient` either to:
a) use custom prometheus behaviour; or
b) get your metrics output
there is a utility function on `MetricsSystem`
```swift
let myProm = try MetricsSystem.prometheus()
```
This will either return the `PrometheusClient` used with `.bootstrap()` or throw an error if `MetricsSystem` was not bootstrapped with `PrometheusClient`

> *Note: There currently is no support for retrieving `PrometheusClient` when being used with `MultiplexMetricsHandler`* 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*Note: There currently is no support for retrieving a `PrometheusClient` when using `MultiplexMetricsHandler`* 
```

#### Without swift-metrics

To get started, initialise an instance of `PrometheusClient`
```swift
import Prometheus
let myProm = PrometheusClient()
```
Once done, you can use the `create*` APIs to create any of the above described metric types.

```swift
// MetricLabels is a helper type used to add labeled metrics.
struct MyCodable: MetricLabels {
   var thing: String = "*"
}

// - Counter
let counter = myProm.createCounter(forType: Int.self, named: "my_counter", helpText: "Just a counter", initialValue: 42, withLabelType: MyCodable.self)

counter.inc() // Increment by one
counter.inc(12) // Increment by a value
counter.inc(12, MyCodable(thing: "test")) // Increment a labeled counter

// - Gauge
let gauge = myProm.createGauge(forType: Int.self, named: "my_gauge", helpText: "Just a gauge", initialValue: 42, withLabelType: MyCodable.self)
gauge.inc() // Same APIs as Counter
gauge.dec() // Same APIs as `inc()` but reversed.
gauge.set(42) // Set the gauge to a specific value

// - Histogram

> // Histograms use special labels, different than the Counter & Gauge

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// Histograms in Prometheus use special labels, which are different from Counter & Gauge
```

Author: The context should be clear here with regards to the rest of the code block

Reviewer 4: Works for me!
